---
title: '2013-11-06 - Mental Health Workforce Data'
changed: '2013-11-06T15:40:28.'
---

<p>The Department of Health and Ageing has asked the ATAPS evaluation team to include data about the ATAPS mental health workforce on the MDS. The purpose of maintaining MHPro data on the MDS is so that the ATAPS Mental Health Professional workforce can be reported on at regular intervals and any changes to the composition of the workforce can be observed. In the past two years the reporting of health workforce data has been increasing, and it is important that ATAPS also has the potential to showcase the distribution, diversity and quality of its workforce.</p>
<p>Two options for collecting this information are outlined in the next section.</p>
<p>In 2010 a survey was designed to capture demographic and professional information about the Mental Health Professionals (MHPros) delivering ATAPS services with the intention of this information becoming an ongoing feature of the MDS. Given the pressures of migrating the MDS from the former Divisions of General Practice to the current Medicare Locals structure, activating the Mental Health Professional data collection functionality on the MDS was put on hold. However, we are now in a position for this information to be captured. Therefore ATAPS project officers need to target the active MHPros in their Medicare Local to complete some professional information for inclusion in the MDS. ‘Active MHPro’ means any MHPro who has provided ATAPS services in the past 12 months. When additional MHPros are engaged to provide ATAPS, their professional and sociodemographic data also needs to be collected and entered into the MDS.</p>
<p>There are 12 fields of data to be completed for each MHPro and this should take no more than five minutes per MHPro.</p>
<h2>Updating Mental Health Workforce Data </h2>
<p>There are 2 options for completing the Mental Health Workforce Data; your choice of option may be dependent on the number of MHPros working within your Medicare Local. <strong>Option 1, </strong>where data is entered directly into the Minimum Dataset by Medicare Local staff, may be most useful for those Medicare Locals with only a few providers, whereas <strong>Option 2,</strong> where the individual Mental Health Professional enters their own details, may be more appropriate for Medicare Locals with a large number of providers. </p>
<p>More information on Option 1 is available at <a href="option-1/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/announcements/2013-10-30/option-1/</a></p>
<p>More information on Option 2 is available at <a href="option-2/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/announcements/2013-10-30/option-2/</a></p>
<p>All Mental Health Professional Data for active MHPros should be completed on the MDS by the close of business on <strong>Friday 22</strong><strong>nd</strong><strong> of November 2013.</strong> </p>
<p>If you are having some difficulty with using the ATAPS minimum dataset, Strategic Data Pty Ltd maintain the <a href="../../../index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/</a> website. This includes a list of frequently asked questions and their answers at <a href="../../user-documentation/faq/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/faq/</a>. So if you have a question, maybe there's an answer already. This is a live document and is therefore regularly updated. </p>
<p>If you cannot find the information you are looking for, support is available at <a href="mailto:support@ataps-mds.com.">support@ataps-mds.com.</a> Please send all technical queries to this address. </p>    
