---
title: 'Mental Health Workforce Data'
changed: '2013-11-06T15:40:28'
---

<p>The Department of Health and Ageing has asked the ATAPS evaluation team to include data about the ATAPS mental health workforce on the MDS. The purpose of maintaining MHPro data on the MDS is so that the ATAPS Mental Health Professional workforce can be reported on at regular intervals and any changes to the composition of the workforce can be observed. In the past two years the reporting of health workforce data has been increasing, and it is important that ATAPS also has the potential to showcase the distribution, diversity and quality of its workforce.</p>
<p>Two options for collecting this information are outlined in the next section.</p>
<p>In 2010 a survey was designed to capture demographic and professional information about the Mental Health Professionals (MHPros) delivering ATAPS services with the intention of this information becoming an ongoing feature of the MDS. Given the pressures of migrating the MDS from the former Divisions of General Practice to the current Medicare Locals structure, activating the Mental Health Professional data collection functionality on the MDS was put on hold. However, we are now in a position for this information to be captured. Therefore ATAPS project officers need to target the active MHPros in their Medicare Local to complete some professional information for inclusion in the MDS. ‘Active MHPro’ means any MHPro who has provided ATAPS services in the past 12 months. When additional MHPros are engaged to provide ATAPS, their professional and sociodemographic data also needs to be collected and entered into the MDS.</p>
<p>There are 12 fields of data to be completed for each MHPro and this should take no more than five minutes per MHPro.</p>
<h2>Updating Mental Health Workforce Data </h2>
<p>There are 2 options for completing the Mental Health Workforce Data; your choice of option may be dependent on the number of MHPros working within your Medicare Local. <strong>Option 1, </strong>where data is entered directly into the Minimum Dataset by Medicare Local staff, may be most useful for those Medicare Locals with only a few providers, whereas <strong>Option 2,</strong> where the individual Mental Health Professional enters their own details, may be more appropriate for Medicare Locals with a large number of providers. </p>

<p>All Mental Health Professional Data for active MHPros should be completed on the MDS by the close of business on <strong>Friday 22</strong><strong>nd</strong><strong> of November 2013.</strong> </p>
<p>If you are having some difficulty with using the ATAPS minimum dataset, Strategic Data Pty Ltd maintain the <a href="../../../index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/</a> website. This includes a list of frequently asked questions and their answers at <a href="../../user-documentation/faq/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/faq/</a>. So if you have a question, maybe there's an answer already. This is a live document and is therefore regularly updated. </p>

<h2>Option 1: Access to Mental Health Workforce Data by Medicare Local Staff</h2>
<p>MDS Users can edit the current data for each Mental Health Professional by following the instructions at <a href="../../../user-documentation/user-guide/ataps-help-mental-health-professional-data/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/user-guide/ataps-help-mental-health-professional-data/</a> </p>
<p>You will need to follow these steps</p>
<ol>
<li>Clean up the existing MHPro data that is stored in the MDS. Due to data entry inaccuracy some MHPros have been entered in the MDS multiple times.</li>
<li>To obtain a report on the MHPros currently stored in the MDS for your Medical Local, click ‘Manage MHPros’ and then click ‘Download list of MHPros’. This will download a spreadsheet file which contains a list of all the MHPros in your Medicare Local, the MHPro's email address, their most recent session date, when their Mental Health Workforce Data was last updated and a unique link to their Mental Health Workforce Data update page. The spreadsheet file is suitable for opening and editing in Excel or any spreadsheet application.</li>
<li>Using this report identify any MHPros that have been entered into the MDS multiple times. Decide which code is correct and then using the instructions at <a href="../../../user-documentation/faq/index.html#How_do_I_merge_a_duplicate_MHP_or_referrer_code_in_the_MDS_63">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/faq/#How_do_I_merge_a_duplicate_MHP_or_referrer_code_in_the_MDS_63</a> merge the incorrect codes into the correct code.</li>
<li>Using the <a href="../../../../site/assets/files/1096/mental_health_professional_data_collection_information_option_1.doc">Information for MHPros Option 1</a> document, please fill in the return email/fax details</li>
<li>Send the updated Information for MHPros Option 1 document and the attached <a href="../../../../site/assets/files/1096/mental_health_professional_data_for_the_ataps_minimum_dataset.pdf">data collection form</a> to your MHPros that have given a session since January 2012. Request them to have the forms returned by a date that will allow you to have the data entered in the MDS by Friday 22nd of November 2013.</li>
<li>When the MHPros return the form, enter the data on to the MDS using the instructions above.</li>
<li>Follow-up all MHPros so that data is complete in the MDS by <strong>Friday 22</strong><strong>nd</strong><strong> of November 2013.</strong></li>
</ol>
<p>If you are having some difficulty with using the ATAPS minimum dataset, Strategic Data Pty Ltd maintain the <a href="../../../../index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/</a> website. This includes a list of frequently asked questions and their answers at <a href="../../../user-documentation/faq/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/faq/</a>. So if you have a question, maybe there's an answer already. This is a live document and is therefore regularly updated. </p>


<h2>Option 2: Self access to Mental Health Workforce Data</h2>
<p><strong> </strong>Mental Health Workforce Data can also be entered directly by the MHPro. We have created unique links into the MDS for each MHPro that allows them to edit their details without the need to login. The intention is that a central liaison within the Medicare Local, who has MDS access, can download these links from the MDS and then issue them via email to the relevant MHPros to update their own data. The Medicare Local can then use this list to monitor which Mental Health Professionals have filled in their profile details and who requires follow up. </p>
<p>The following steps explain how this process works:</p>
<ol>
<li>Clean up the existing MHPro data that is stored in the MDS. Due to data entry inaccuracy some MHPros have been entered in the MDS multiple times.</li>
<li>To obtain a report on the MHPros currently stored in the MDS for your Medical Local, click ‘Manage MHPros’ and then click ‘Download list of MHPros’. This will download a spreadsheet file which contains a list of all the MHPros in your Medicare Local, the MHPro's email address, their most recent session date, when their Mental Health Workforce Data was last updated and a unique link to their Mental Health Workforce Data update page. The spreadsheet file is suitable for opening and editing in Excel or any spreadsheet application.</li>
<li>Using this report identify any MHPros that have been entered into the MDS multiple times. Decide which code is correct and then using the instructions at <a href="../../../user-documentation/faq/index.html#How_do_I_merge_a_duplicate_MHP_or_referrer_code_in_the_MDS_63">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/faq/#How_do_I_merge_a_duplicate_MHP_or_referrer_code_in_the_MDS_63</a> merge the incorrect codes into the correct code.</li>
<li>Once you have cleaned up your MHPro data re-download the list of MHPros.</li>
<li>Using the <a href="../../../../site/assets/files/1097/mental_health_professional_data_collection_information_option_2.doc">supplied email template</a>, email each Mental Health Professional that has given a session since January 2012. Please substitute their unique link from the spreadsheet at the appropriate location before sending. </li>
<li>Follow-up MHPros who don’t complete their data so that all information is up to date by <strong>Friday 22</strong><strong>nd</strong><strong> of November 2013.</strong></li>
</ol>
<p>If Medicare Locals would like assistance in emailing details of the Mental Health Workforce Data to their Mental Health Professionals please send an email to <a href="mailto:support@ataps-mds.com">support@ataps-mds.com</a> by <strong>Friday 15</strong><strong>th</strong><strong> November. </strong></p>
<p>If you are having some difficulty with using the ATAPS minimum dataset, Strategic Data Pty Ltd maintain the <a href="../../../../index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/</a> website. This includes a list of frequently asked questions and their answers at <a href="../../../user-documentation/faq/index.html">https://ataps-mds.com/mds/user-documentation/faq/</a>. So if you have a question, maybe there's an answer already. This is a live document and is therefore regularly updated. </p>
<p>If you cannot find the information you are looking for, support is available at <a href="mailto:support@ataps-mds.com.">support@ataps-mds.com.</a> Please send all technical queries to this address. </p>
