---
title: 'Assignment and management of client and provider identifiers for ATAPS data collection'
changed: '2015-12-04T10:00:54.'
---

<p>Please find below a communication from the Department of Health and Strategic Data, who with the University of Melbourne, manage the reporting requirements for the Access to Allied Psychological Services (ATAPS) programme on behalf of the Department of Health.</p>
<h2>ATAPS Data Inequity</h2>
<p>From 1 July 2015, 31 Primary Health Networks (PHNs) replaced 61 Medicare Local geographical regions. While the specific methods of local data collection are the purview of the networks themselves, we would like to emphasise the importance of maintaining existing Access to Allied Psychological Services (ATAPS)-Minimum Data Set (MDS) data integrity following the transition process to PHNs. PHNs have entered into a contractual agreement with the Department of Health to provide a set number of sessions to an individual within a twelve month period. These limits are based on programme type and are defined in the ATAPS operational guidelines. This means that PHNs are responsible for identifying individuals and tracking them centrally in order to ensure that patients are not receiving sessions from more than one provider.</p>
<p>There should only be a single identifier for a patient or provider within a PHN. This allows patients and providers moving within the sub-regions of a PHN to be identified as the same (de-identified) person within the MDS and your own datasets. Planned improvements to reporting within the MDS include figures derived from the number of unique clients seen. Any clients with more than one identifier will reduce the accuracy of the data collection.</p>
<p>In view of the commissioning role of PHNs and the size of their catchment areas, some PHNs are subcontracting service delivery to other organisations. These organisations are allowed to manage their own data independently, including patient identifiers. In order to achieve this, PHNs are partitioning their patient identifiers across their sub-regions, and not centrally managing patient information. Not consolidating identifying information within the PHN has unintended results. For example, a patient could receive treatment from multiple providers, thus receive more than the maximum number of sessions the programme permits within a twelve month period.</p>
<h3><a></a>Expectations</h3>
<p>Where service delivery has been commissioned/subcontracted to other organisations, it remains the PHN's responsibility to ensure that there is a single identifier for a patient or provider within the PHN.  Furthermore, it remains the PHN's responsibility to ensure that the identifiers are unique and are not duplicated between contracted service providers.</p>
<h3><a></a>Assistance and advice</h3>
<p>Some providers of client management software are aware of the problem the PHNs have in centrally tracking patients and are looking at implementing solutions. Please contact your local software provider to see if they can assist you.</p>
<p>PHNs are encouraged to share examples of best practice. In order to facilitate this a <a href="../../user-documentation/assignment-and-management-of-client-and-provider-identifiers/index.html">website</a> has been set up where examples of best practice can be shared. If your PHN is currently centrally managing identifiers, it would be appreciated if you could email the ATAPS MDS support team (by sending an email to <a href="mailto:support@ataps-mds.com">support@ataps-mds.com</a>) describing how your organisation manages identifiers so that your experience can be shared with other PHNs.</p>
<p>We are also aware that some PHNs are centrally managing their patient and provider information but are still partitioning their identifiers in order to manage the volume. While there are no set protocols, we would strongly discourage encoding region information within an identifier as region information can and has changed. A method by which referrals can be tagged is currently being implemented. This will give PHNs a method to partition their data without encoding information into the patient identifier. PHNs will be advised when this feature is available.</p>
<p>If required, identifiers for patients and providers can be bulk recoded within the MDS. Any PHN that requires recoding their client and/or provider identifiers can contact the ATAPS MDS support team (by sending an email to <a href="mailto:support@ataps-mds.com">support@ataps-mds.com</a>) to discuss options and implications in more detail.</p>
